<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE article PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.5//EN"
    "http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/4.5/docbookx.dtd">
<article>
  <title>FCardSaver Manual</title>

  <refentry>
    <refmeta>
      <refentrytitle>fcardsaver</refentrytitle>
      <manvolnum>6x</manvolnum>
    </refmeta>
    <refnamediv>
      <refname>fcardsaver</refname>
      <refpurpose>screensaver for displaying flash cards</refpurpose>
    </refnamediv>
    <refsynopsisdiv>
      <cmdsynopsis>
        <command>fcardsaver</command>
        <group choice="opt">
          <option>-root</option>
          <option>-window <replaceable>window-id</replaceable></option>
          <option>-setup</option>
          <option>-demo</option>
          <option>-help</option>
        </group>
        <arg choice="opt"><replaceable class="option">Qt-options</replaceable></arg>
        <arg choice="opt">-caption <replaceable>title</replaceable></arg>
        <arg choice="opt">-icon <replaceable>icon</replaceable></arg>
        <arg choice="opt"><replaceable>qtoptions</replaceable></arg>
      </cmdsynopsis>
    </refsynopsisdiv>
    <refsect1>
      <title>Description</title>
      <para><application>FCardSaver</application> is cross-platform screensaver
            that displays "flash cards", tuples of connected facts, in a table.
            It is written using Qt and should, theoretically, be able to run on
            any platform supported by Qt; however, only X11 and MS Windows versions
            are implemented.</para>
      <para>Note that command line format specified in this manual is for X11
            version only. Command line format for MS Windows version is mandated
            by Microsoft specification in
            <ulink url="http://support.microsoft.com/kb/182383"><citetitle>MS KB182383</citetitle></ulink>.</para>
      <para>Initial goal of development was to devise a replacement for
            <application>kannasaver</application> (dropped from Ubuntu Maverick as
            unmaintained since 2007). In time, application extended to cover also
            functionality contained in <application>kanjisaver</application>
            (dropped from Ubuntu Natty), as well as more generic functionality.</para>
      <para>Each flash card displayed by <application>FCardSaver</application> is
            a tuple of facts (textual fragments). Screen is divided into a
            rectangular grid and each fact is either displayed in one of cells,
            or omitted.</para>
      <para>Flash cards are organized in sets, and each set may specify its own
            configuration parameters including step of the grid, background colour,
            default text colour for each cell, which fact is displayed in which cell,
            and so on.</para>
      <para>Setup dialog for <application>FCardSaver</application> allows setting of
            default values for all configuration parameters. It also allows editing
            the list of flash card set files to display. Note that file paths are
            specified relative to flash card set base directory, unless they reside
            outside of it, in which case absolute paths are required.</para>
      <para>Format of flash card set files is given in 
            <citerefentry><refentrytitle>fcardsaver-cardset</refentrytitle><manvolnum>7</manvolnum></citerefentry>.</para>
    </refsect1>
    <refsect1>
      <title>Options</title>
      <variablelist>
        <varlistentry>
          <term><option>-root</option></term>
          <listitem>
            <simpara>Displays the screensaver in the root window.</simpara>
          </listitem>
        </varlistentry>
        <varlistentry>
          <term><option>-window <replaceable>window-id</replaceable></option></term>
          <listitem>
            <simpara>Displays the screensaver in specified window.</simpara>
          </listitem>
        </varlistentry>
        <varlistentry>
          <term><option>-demo</option></term>
          <listitem>
            <simpara>Displays the screensaver in a new window. This is the default mode.</simpara>
          </listitem>
        </varlistentry>
        <varlistentry>
          <term><option>-setup</option></term>
          <listitem>
            <simpara>Displays screensaver configuration dialog.</simpara>
          </listitem>
        </varlistentry>
        <varlistentry>
          <term><option>-help</option></term>
          <listitem>
            <simpara>Prints short command synopsis and exits.</simpara>
          </listitem>
        </varlistentry>
      </variablelist>
      <para>KDE-mandated options <option>-caption</option> and <option>-icon</option>
            are ignored. Note that <application>FCardSaver</application>
            doesn't link KDE libraries and, therefore, doesn't support
            complete set of KDE options.</para>
      <para>Besides that, <application>FCardSaver</application> also supports
            all standard Qt options, as documented in
            <citerefentry><refentrytitle>qtoptions</refentrytitle><manvolnum>7</manvolnum></citerefentry>.</para>
    </refsect1>
    <refsect1>
      <title>Configuration parameters</title>
      <para>This section lists configuration parameters supported by current
            version of <application>FCardSaver</application>.</para>
      <para>Most <application>FCardSaver</application> configuration parameters
            (with the exception of the card set file list and the trace color)
            can be specified both in configuration (configuration file for X11
            version or registry key for MS Windows version) and in a card set
            file. Syntax for specifying configuration parameters in a card set
            file is given in 
            <citerefentry><refentrytitle>fcardsaver-cardset</refentrytitle><manvolnum>7</manvolnum></citerefentry>.</para>
      <para>When a card is displayed, configuration parameters used for it are
            looked up in following order:
            <orderedlist>
              <listitem>Parameters specified in the same card set file prior
                        to the card (the latest specification gets precedence).</listitem>
              <listitem>If this card set file is included into another file,
                        parameters specified in the including file prior to
                        the inclusion point (the latest specification gets
                        precedence).</listitem>
              <listitem>Parameters specified in the configuration (configuration
                        file or registry key).</listitem>
            </orderedlist></para>
      <refsect2>
        <title>Syntaxes</title>
        <para>Values specified in the configuration parameters both in configuration
              file or registry, and in a card set file, belong to one of several types.
              In many cases format used by these types is dictated by the medium
              (for example, integer values in the regsitry use registry type REG_DWORD);
              nevertheless there are some situations where <application>FCardSaver</application>
              uses its own data formats on top of plain text strings. This section
              describes such syntaxes.</para>
        <variablelist>
          <varlistentry>
            <term>Text strings</term>
            <listitem>Text strings in parameter values specified in a card set file
                      use double-quote character ('"') for quoting and backslash
                      character ('\') for escaping double-quote character inside
                      the string. Any string containing whitespace, comma, or
                      double-quote character, must be quoted.</listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term>Floating-point values</term>
            <listitem>Floating-point numbers in parameter values specified in a card
                      set file use dot character ('.') as fractional part separator.</listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term>Color values</term>
            <listitem><simpara>Color values are specified as a text containing color name or
                      color definition.</simpara>
                      <simpara>Color definition is given as
                               <literal>"#<replaceable>RGB</replaceable>"</literal>,
                               where each of <replaceable>R</replaceable>, <replaceable>G</replaceable>
                               and <replaceable>B</replaceable> is a hexadecimal
                               number specifying corresponding color component
                               (red, green, or blue). Numbers may contain from
                               1 to 4 hexadecimal digits, but all components
                               must use the same number of digits.</simpara>
                      <simpara>Color name can be any of SVG color keyword names.
                               In some cases additional values <literal>"transparent"</literal>
                               and empty string are accepted to specify absence
                               of color.</simpara></listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term>Single-character values</term>
            <listitem><simpara>Single-character values (for example, card set file
                               delimiter character) are specified as a text containing
                               single character or character definition.</simpara>
                      <simpara>Character definition is given as
                               <literal>"#<replaceable>CCCC</replaceable>"</literal>,
                               where <replaceable>CCCC</replaceable> is hexadecimal
                               Unicode code point number. For example,
                               <literal>"#0009"</literal> specifies Unicode character
                               "U+0009 CHARACTER TABULATION".</simpara></listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        </variablelist>
      </refsect2>
      <refsect2>
        <title>General section</title>
        <para>Parameters listed in this section are placed in section
              <property>[general]</property> of the configuration file (X11), or
              under registry subkey <property>"general\"</property> (MS Windows).
              Unless explicitly marked otherwise, they can be also specified in
              the card set file.</para>
        <variablelist termlength="5" spacing="normal">
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>background</command> <replaceable>color</replaceable></term>
            <listitem>Card background color. Default value is
                      <literal>black</literal>.</listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>split-{x|y}</command> <replaceable>size</replaceable>,...</term>
            <listitem>Relative size of columns or rows of the card. Size can
                      be specified in arbitrary units, so, say, <userinput>3,4,3</userinput>
                      and <userinput>15,20,15</userinput> specify the same
                      split. Default value for both splits is <literal>20,60,20</literal>.</listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>trace</command> <replaceable>color</replaceable> (config only)</term>
              <listitem>Cell trace color. Cell trace can used to debug card split.
                        Default value is empty string (no trace).</listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>period</command> <replaceable>msec</replaceable></term>
            <listitem>Card display time, in milliseconds. Default value is
                      <literal>3000</literal> (3 sec).</listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        </variablelist>
      </refsect2>
      <refsect2>
        <title>Display parameters section</title>
        <para>Parameters listed in this section are placed under an
              array in section <property>[display]</property> of the
              configuration file (X11), or in registry subkey
              <property>"display\"</property> (MS Windows). Array is
              indexed by fact index, 1-based. If a card contains more
              facts than there are display parameter sets specified,
              the remaining facts will not be displayed.</para>
        <variablelist>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>cell</command> <replaceable>cell-x</replaceable>,<replaceable>cell-y</replaceable></term>
            <listitem>Column and row of the cell where the fact will
                      be displayed. Value <literal>-1</literal> for
                      any coordinate marks the fact as not displayed.</listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>color</command> <replaceable>color</replaceable></term>
            <listitem>Specifies default text color for the displayed fact.
                      Default value is <literal>white</literal>.</listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>font</command> <replaceable>font-family</replaceable></term>
            <listitem>Specifies default text font family for the displayed fact.
                      Default value is <literal>Helvetica</literal>.</listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>lines</command> <replaceable>num-lines</replaceable></term>
            <listitem>Specifies approximate number of lines for the displayed fact.
                      May be non-integer. If this parameter is specified and positive,
                      its value is used to calculate initial default font size. Font
                      size may be further decremented if the text of the fact doesn't
                      fit in the cell. Default value is <literal>0</literal>.</listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>pattern</command> <replaceable>pattern-text</replaceable></term>
            <listitem>Specifies fact text preprocessing pattern. Pattern is a non-empty
                      text string containing sequence <literal>"%1"</literal>. If pattern
                      is specified, each occurence of this sequence is replaced by the
                      fact text, and the result is used instead of the original text.
                      Default value is empty string (no pattern).</listitem>
          </varlistentry>
          <varlistentry>
            <term><command>stylesheet</command> <replaceable>stylesheet-text</replaceable></term>
            <listitem>Specifies CSS stylesheet for the displayed fact. Only a subset
                      of CSS supported by Qt library may be specified.
                      Default value is empty string (use default stylesheet).</listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        </variablelist>
        <para>Display parameter sets may be also specified in the flash card set file
              using following syntax:</para>
        <para><cmdsynopsis><command>cell</command> <arg choice="plain"
                ><replaceable>cell-x</replaceable>,<replaceable>cell-y</replaceable
                ><arg choice="opt">,<replaceable>color</replaceable
                ><arg choice="opt">,<replaceable>font-family</replaceable
                ><arg choice="opt">,<replaceable>num-lines</replaceable
                ><arg choice="opt">,<replaceable>pattern-text</replaceable
                ><arg choice="opt">,<replaceable>stylesheet-text</replaceable
                ></arg></arg></arg></arg></arg></arg></cmdsynopsis></para>
      </refsect2>
      <refsect2>
        <title>Card sets section</title>
        <para>Parameters listed in this section are placed under an
              array in section <property>[cardsets]</property> of the
              configuration file (X11), or in registry subkey
              <property>"cardsets\"</property> (MS Windows).</para>
        <para>Each array element contains two parameters,
              <command>path</command> and <command>separator</command>,
              specifying path to a flash card set file and delimiter
              character used by this file.</para>
      </refsect2>
      <refsect2>
        <title>Card set file inclusion</title>
        <para>Flash card set file may include another flash card set file.
              Such inclusion uses following parameter syntax:</para>
        <para><cmdsynopsis><command>include</command> <arg choice="plain"
              ><replaceable>file-path</replaceable
              >,<replaceable>delim-char</replaceable></arg></cmdsynopsis></para>
        <para>Path to the included file may be specified relative to
              the including file, or as an absolute path.</para>
        <para>Note that file inclusion is inheriting; that means that
              configuration parameters specified in the including file
              continue to work on the included file, unless explicitly
              overridden.</para>
      </refsect2>
    </refsect1>
    <refsect1>
      <title>Files</title>
      <variablelist>
        <varlistentry>
          <term><filename class="directory">~/.config/ALKOSoft/FCardSaver.conf</filename> (X11)</term>
          <term><property>HKCU\Software\ALKOSoft\FCardSaver\</property> (MS Windows)</term>
          <listitem><simpara>Location of <application>FCardSaver</application> configuration.</simpara></listitem>
        </varlistentry>
        <varlistentry>
          <term><filename class="directory">/usr/share/fcardsaver/</filename> (X11)</term>
          <term><filename class="directory"><envar>%CommonAppData%</envar>\ALKOSoft\FCardSaver\</filename> (MS Windows)</term>
          <listitem><simpara>Base directory for flash card set files.</simpara></listitem>
        </varlistentry>
      </variablelist>
    </refsect1>
    <refsect1>
      <title>Author</title>
      <para>Alec Kojaev <email>alec@kojaev.name</email></para>
    </refsect1>
    <refsect1>
      <title>See also</title>
      <para><simplelist type="inline">
        <member><citerefentry><refentrytitle>X</refentrytitle><manvolnum>1</manvolnum></citerefentry></member>
        <member><citerefentry><refentrytitle>fcardsaver-cardset</refentrytitle><manvolnum>7</manvolnum></citerefentry></member>
      </simplelist></para>
    </refsect1>
  </refentry>

  <refentry>
    <refmeta>
      <refentrytitle>fcardsaver-cardset</refentrytitle>
      <manvolnum>7</manvolnum>
    </refmeta>
    <refnamediv>
      <refname>fcardsaver-cardset</refname>
      <refpurpose>FCardSaver card set file structure</refpurpose>
    </refnamediv>
    <refsect1>
      <title>Overview</title>
      <para><application>FCardSaver</application> card set file format is based
            on format of plain text files supported by <application>Anki</application>
            import function. In fact, any <application>FCardSaver</application>
            card set file will be accepted as valid by <application>Anki</application>.</para>
      <para>A card set file is a plain text file in UTF-8 encoding. Any line
            starting with hash sign ("#") is a comment; all comments except
            those starting with "#FCARD#" are ignored (see below). Each
            non-comment line except, optionally, the first non-comment line,
            contain delimiter-separated values with quoting and escaping rules
            defined by <citation>RFC 4180</citation> (CSV).</para>
      <para>Card set files shipped with <application>FCardSaver</application>
            usually are tab-separated, but any single-character separator is
            supported. Unlike <application>Anki</application>, <application>FCardSaver</application>
            doesn't try to guess the separator, but expects the user to specify
            the separator for each file in the configuration dialog.</para>
    </refsect1>
    <refsect1>
      <title>Cards</title>
      <para>Each line of delimiter-separated values defines a "card", a tuple
            of text fields. Each text block is interpreted as a HTML fragment,
            using a subset of HTML supported by Qt library.</para>
      <para>Delimiter-separated values use quoting and escaping rules from the
            CSV standard. Each field that contains double-quote character,
            separator character, or explicit line break, must be enclosed in
            double-quotes, with all internal double-quote characters escaped as
            double double-quote ('""').</para>
      <para>All explicit line breaks within quoted fields are replaced by HTML
            tag <literal>&lt;br&gt;</literal>.</para>
    </refsect1>
    <refsect1>
      <title>Optional tags line</title>
      <para>If the first non-comment line in the card set file starts with
            prefix <literal>tags:</literal>, it is not split according to the
            general rules. Instead, the remaining part of string after the
            prefix is split by whitespace, and the resulting list of words is
            interpreted as "tags" to be added to the end of each card. That is,
            file
            <informalexample><programlisting>
tags: family relationship
pater,father
mater,mother
filius,son
            </programlisting></informalexample>
            is equivalent to file
            <informalexample><programlisting>
pater,father,family,relationship
mater,mother,family,relationship
filius,son,family,relationship
            </programlisting></informalexample>
      </para>
    </refsect1>
    <refsect1>
      <title>FCardSaver-specific comments</title>
      <para>Comment lines that start with <literal>#FCARD#</literal> are
            interpreted by <application>FCardSaver</application>. Remaining
            part of the line is separated by whitespace into two fields:
            parameter name and parameter value. Parameter value is further
            split into parts by commas.</para>
      <para>Complete list of supported parameters and their values is given
            in <citerefentry><refentrytitle>fcardsaver</refentrytitle><manvolnum>6x</manvolnum></citerefentry>.</para>
    </refsect1>
    <refsect1>
      <title>Author</title>
      <para>Alec Kojaev <email>alec@kojaev.name</email></para>
    </refsect1>
    <refsect1>
      <title>See also</title>
      <para><simplelist type="inline">
        <member><citerefentry><refentrytitle>fcardsaver</refentrytitle><manvolnum>6x</manvolnum></citerefentry></member>
      </simplelist></para>
    </refsect1>
  </refentry>
</article>
